Hi, I'm Veerle. I'm a data scientist, consultant and corporate trainer who loves working with R
and enjoys anything web development related. In this video, I'm going to talk about a package
that is called QueryChat. Okay, so simply put, I'm a bit of a data nerd and I really enjoy
working with data. Since you're watching this video, you probably love working with data too.
And perhaps you also really love building dashboards with it. Now, let's say Shiny is
your happy place. You design carefully, you collect feedback, you refine layouts, you
handle edge cases. Your dashboard is solid, bulletproof even. So let's say you build a
dashboard showing women's international soccer matches. You're proud of it and you show it to
a colleague. They say, wow, this looks amazing. Can you show me only FIFA World Cup matches?
You say, of course, and you confidently click a filter. Then they say, oh, that's nice. Can you
show me all the matches where the Netherlands played? Oh, suddenly things get awkward because,
well, there is no country filter. And adding one means changing the UI, touching the code,
redeploying the app, and probably getting another coffee first. And then comes the follow-up question
and another one and another. And at some point it becomes painfully clear. Even the best dashboard
can't answer every question that you have. And that's exactly where QueryChat comes in.
So what is QueryChat? Well, QueryChat makes it easy to query data using natural language.
It offers three things. One, a dropping component for Shiny. Two, a console interface. And three,
other programmatic building blocks that you can use. You ask questions, QueryChat translates it
to SQL, executes it, and returns the results. The results are then available as a report.
The results are then available as a reactive data frame, which makes it easy to display or
further process the data. There's no clicking, no predefined filters, just you, your data set,
and questions like, show me matches where the Netherlands played in the World Cup? Or can you
filter two matches from the 2025 UEFA Euro? Or which team has the best win rate in the Canada
versus United States matches? Well, it sounds and looks cool, right? In this video, I'll show
you three things. First, how to get started with QueryChat in seconds. Secondly, how it works under
the hood and why it is reliable, transparent, reproducible, and safe. Thirdly, how to build
custom polished interfaces around it. Let's start with the best part, getting started. Since
QueryChat uses a large language model, aka LLM, to translate your questions into SQL, we need an API
key for such a model. There are a lot of choices when it comes to provider and model, but in this
demo, we'll be using Cloud 4.5. Feel free to pick your favorite provider and model. Other good
choices would be GPT 4.1, which is the current default for QueryChat, or Google Gemini 3.0.
Basically, as long as Elmer supports it, you're good to go. Right, once you have your key, you put it
in your R environment file, and then we can get started with QueryChat. First, we install QueryChat
from CRAN, we load QueryChat, then point QueryChat to our data set, results with scorers, then we
specify our provider and model, and that's basically it. We can now run a Shiny application
with the app method. Okay, so let's see what we can actually do here. So I type a question, let's
say, well, can you show me all the matches where the Netherlands played? Then we hit enter, we wait
for a bit, and then we can see that our data is being updated. We also see the SQL query, which is
a simple one that filters based on the home or away team, and then QueryChat proposes some follow-up
questions. So I could just click on one, like, well, which players have scored the most goals
for the Netherlands? And it appears in the chat box. Again, we have to wait a bit, but once it's
finished, we see a nice table with the number of goals for each Dutch player. The top scorer here
is Vivianne Miedema, followed by Lieke Martens, and you see how easy it is to explore the data
like this. This is great. So within seconds, you have a working chat interface connected to your
data. You type questions, and QueryChat interprets the question, generates SQL, executes it, and shows
you the results. Yes, this works for grouping, filtering, summaries, comparisons, you name it.
It's amazing how little code you need, right? You're not building a complex UI here. You're not
defining every possible input that is out there. You're just letting users ask the questions they
actually care about. This is extremely powerful, and it's also intriguing at the same time.
So I can imagine you wonder, well, how does QueryChat actually work?
QueryChat is more than just a chat window sitting on top of a dataset.
With QueryChat, you never have to think about how to get to an answer. You don't have to think about
what filters to apply or how to extract information from the filter data. No, you simply ask any
question that comes to mind and QueryChat handles the rest. And yeah, yeah, yeah, I hear you. You
could also ask all those questions in a typical LLM chat tool, but QueryChat is different. You
are not relying on the LLM to invent answers or reason about the data internally. No, every single
question is translated into SQL, and this SQL is executed on the actual dataset and returned
exactly as the data dictates. And very important, the SQL is always shown. This means you can see
precisely what is being run. So that's great. All right. Four benefits of QueryChat. One, reliability.
The LLM does not analyze or transform the raw data itself. It only generates SQL text. QueryChat
handles the execution of that SQL via tool calling, so all the results come from the real
data engine and not from the model's internal guesswork. Two, transparency. Every query reveals
the full SQL statement. Nothing is hidden, nothing is adjusted, and you always know how the answer was
produced. Three, reproducibility. Since every SQL query is visible, analysis can be reused, shared,
and audited. And four, safety. QueryChat's tools are designed with read-only actions in mind,
meaning the LLM is essentially unable to perform any destructive actions.
All right, let's go back for a second. I mentioned QueryChat handles execution of the SQL via
something called tool calling. Well, tool calling is essentially a bridge between an LLM and your R
session. The model does not execute code. Instead, it requests your R session to execute a certain
function with certain inputs. Once R performs the execution, the result is then passed back
to the model for interpretation. But the LLM does need to know something about your data,
you know, things like which columns are there, what do they mean, and what type are they.
This schema information is shared with the model, but not the raw data itself. With this information,
it produces a SQL query as a tool call. Now, to run SQL, you do need a database engine,
and QueryChat's weapon of choice is WDB. If you have your own database, that's no problem too.
Whatever DBI, this is a database interface package for R, supports can be used by QueryChat.
Pretty clever, huh?
Now, we can do much more with QueryChat than just pass it a data frame and launch a basic
shiny app. We can also build our own custom interface, and that all starts with customizing
QueryChat's behavior. We can tweak the QueryChat object parameters to our liking. For example,
we can, and we should, add a custom greeting, which we can provide in a markdown file,
with nice span HTML tags that make the suggestions clickable and put them right in the chat box when
you click them. The greeting is the first thing people see, you know, so you better make it good.
Besides adding a greeting, we can also add a data description, which will give the LLM
some more context about the data that we're using. And this is especially helpful if you
have cryptic column names or data that is, you know, very niche. Again, we provide this
information in a markdown file, and there's no specific format needed in this case. So what we
do here, we provide a general description of the data, and we specify all the columns with their
type, providing context where needed. The more the model knows about the columns and their types,
the better SQL it generates. Now, you don't have to provide this extra information. If you don't,
QueryChat will just send column names and types, and it lets the LLM figure out the rest.
Finally, we can add some extra instructions too. And no surprises here, but we also provide these
in a markdown file, and these instructions can further tweak the LLM's behavior. You can add
anything you like. For example, let the LLM use pirate speech or, you know, an overkill of emojis,
or, you know, you can be a bit more serious and let the model use British or English spelling
or directions on the terminology we use, like we're doing here. Right, so that's all looking
solid. We have a greeting, we have a good data description, and we have extra instructions.
Now, the next step would be to create an interface. If we want to build a custom interface,
we need a chat window. QueryChat plays especially nice with a chat window in a sidebar, which you
can call with the sidebar method. Now, normally, a sidebar is the perfect place to have all your
filters, a year filter, a country filter, a tournament filter, you name it. Now, this sidebar
method, resulting in a chat window, is all you need. And obviously, you would want to use the result
QueryChat returns. As said earlier, QueryChat returns a reactive data frame that can be used to
further process or display the data. So, how do you get it? Well, with the server method. In this case,
we're storing our reactive data frame in a reactive called FilterData, and this reactive can be used
to base value boxes, maps, graphs, tables on. As soon as the FilterData changes, your dashboard
view changes as well. Now, let's inspect our code a little bit closer. First, we need to
load some packages like Shiny and, of course, QueryChat. Then, we load our data, results with
scores, and we apply an initial filter to it. The next thing we do is building our QC object,
calling QueryChat new, and we provide all the information that we talked about earlier. The
data, the name of the table, our client's greeting, a data description, and, of course,
the last thing, some extra instructions. In our UI, in the page sidebar function, we then add a QC
sidebar. And then, we have the rest of our UI. We have three value boxes right here. Then, we have
here our leaflet map. Then, we have a graph built with e-charts for R, and we have a reactable
table. In our server, it's as simple as assigning the results of QC server to a variable called
FilterData. Now, then, subsequently, in every output, we use that reactive data. So, here,
if you want to determine the top-scoring country, we also do that here and here. You'll get the
idea. We do this for every output in our app. And the result? Well, this nice interface that
can handle any question we want. Remember the conversation with our colleague from the very
beginning? All the questions are not an issue anymore. There are no custom filters. There are
no limits. It's just QueryChat. And in just 10 minutes, you learned how to use QueryChat to build
your next app. I want to come back to one important aspect of QueryChat, though, which is
safety. Because is this safe? And yeah, it's a fair question. But luckily, QueryChat is designed
entirely around control. The LLM never executes anything itself. It never touches your database
or data, and it never sees the raw data. Its only job is to propose read-only SQL. If you ask to
edit the data or to drop tables, it will simply refuse. And that's not because the model has your
best interests at heart, but because it's instructed to do so. Now, combine that with an underlying
database, DuckDB or your own, that only provides read-only access, and your data will be left
untouched. So, no destructive actions on your production database when you set QueryChat's
database permissions to read-only. And, you know, it's not a black box either. Every query can be
logged, inspected, or audited. And do you want to use QueryChat in enterprise or regulated environments?
Well, if you need to use private or managed LLMs, you're covered as well. You can use Azure, AWS
Bedrock, Google Vertex AI, all provide versions of popular models that support tool calling and
can thus work with QueryChat. Now, you heard me talking for 10 minutes, but if you want to read
more about QueryChat at your own pace, I have some resources for you too. First of all, the
QueryChat documentation, obviously. And secondly, where questions become queries on the shiny blog
written by me. You can find the relevant links in the description. I'll also add a link to the
GitHub repo where you can find the complete code for the SheScores app that you just saw.
Thanks for watching!